Hello friends
In this video let us have a discussion on linked
list versus array
So see an example for each
We have array with elements 10 20 and
30 and linked list with elements 10 20 and 30
Now let us focus on the memory locations where the
elements are stored. In array
we can see that the elements are stored in
contiguous memory locations see 1024 then 1028 then 1032
like that
But is that so with linked list No The linked
list elements are stored in random memory locations which are
linked together using pointers
See we have 1024 then we have 2028
Then we have 3032
But each node has a pointer pointing to the next node
Now let us discuss about the kind of memory
allocations
So for arrays it is static memory allocation
That is the memory is allocated at compile time so
we need to specify the array size and it will
be fixed throughout the program.
That means we can't change the size of the array
at run time and the memory will be allocated in the stack
section
See an example int arr of 5
Now the size of array will be 5 and it will
be five throughout the program and we can't increase the
size then
And what about linked list Using linked list we can
add as many elements as we need at run time
that is here
Memory is allocated dynamically and it will be allocated in
the heap section
We can add more elements based on our need at
run time now let us discuss about accessing elements
So in an array elements can be accessed directly using
the index value for example we can access the third
element using arr of two and it's time complexity will
be order of one
Meanwhile in linked list we need to traverse the list
from the beginning to find the element that is if
we need to access the third element
First we need to go to the first node then
get the address of second node and visit the second
node
Get the address of third node and visit it
finally if the linked list has n elements and in the
worst case we need to traverse the linked list till
the end to find the element
So the time complexity will be order of n
Now let us discuss on basic operations like insertion and
deletion
So in arrays insertion and deletion operations take more
time because after inserting or deleting an element we need
to shift all the other elements
See an example
Then it will be clear
Here we have an array with elements 10 20 and 30
Now if we need to delete 10 after deletion we
need to shift all the elements
one position to the left
Now if we need to insert 100 at index zero
we need to shift all the elements one position to
the right and then only we can place 100 at
index zero and for linked lists insertion and deletion operation
is faster compared to arrays
For example let us say we need to delete the
element 20
We can simply make the first node point to the
third node instead of second node so we will get like
this
Similarly if we need to insert the element 100 after
20 we can simply set node with Element 20 pointing
to new node and new node pointing to node with
30 So these are some basic differences between arrays
and linked lists
So we discussed about memory allocation
Arrays are allocated contiguous memory at compile time and
the memory is allocated randomly in linked list at run time
so we can make the memory size grow or shrink based
on our need in linked list
But it is fixed in arrays
Also we can access arrays easily using indices
but it is difficult in linked list
An insertion and deletion operation are slower in arrays
but compared to arrays it is faster in linked
list
So thats all
And in the next video we will discuss about applications
of linked list
Thank you